PCprophet_instructions.md, before:

## PCprophet (command line version)

In the PCprophet package, all parameters can be configured either via the ‘ProphetConfig.conf’ file or via by running PCprophet using the command. When running the PCprophet, the parameters indicated in the command will be written into the ‘ProphetConfig.conf’ file. Generally, four types of features are needed:


### Parameter setup


##### Global parameters:

```
-Output The output folder
-sid  Sample identifier file
-cal  Calibration file (no headers)
-mw_uniprot Gene names to molecular mass
-db Database (either in CORUM format or STRING format)
```

**Note:** -db can be either a protein-protein interaction network or a complex database but it __always needs to be provided__.

The CORUM-link database can be user provided but as minimal requirement needs to have the following columns

- *ComplexID* unique numeric identifier
- *ComplexName* complex identifier
- *subunits(Gene name)* ; separated list of __gene names__ for the corresponding complex

Examples for this format can be downloaded from [CORUM](http://mips.helmholtz-muenchen.de/corum/#download)

In case of PPI database the format needs to be

|ProtA|ProtB|
|:----|:----|
|A    |B    |
|D    |A    |
|C    |E    |

In this case a Markov clustering is first performed to generate putative complexes which are then used for FDR control. PPI derived complexes are characterize by the identifier ppi__nr where nr stands for the cluster number from the Markov cluster

##### Pre-processing parameters:

```
-all_fract  The number of fractions to use [1, X].
-is_ppi Is the provided database a PPI network or a complex database
-merge  Choose ‘all’ for using data-driven+database based hypothesis generation and ‘reference’ use only database derived complexes

```


##### Post-processing parameters:

```
-co Mode for collapsing hypothesis to common complexes
-fdr  False discovery rate for hypothesis 0 > FDR > 1

```

**-co flag in depth** Due to the redundant nature of the complexes generated by hypothesis generation is necessary to collapse positives into single complex. Following there is an example and description of the parameter

| Members   | GO Score  |Prediction probability|# Members|Estimated MW |
|:----------|:----------|:---------------------|:--------|:------------|
|A,B        |0.6        |0.75                  |2        |90000        |
|A,B,C      |0.4        |0.6                   |3        |190000       |
|A,B,C,D    |0.3        |0.9                   |4        |250000       |

**-co GO** Selects the complex with the highest Go score per dendogram branch  (A,B)

**-co P** Selects the complex with the highest probability per dendogram branch (A,B,C,D)

**-co SUPER** Selects the complex with the highest number of members (superset) per dendrogram branch (A,B,C,D)


**-co CAL** Extrapolates the molecular weight from the apex peak for the reported complex using the calibration provided. Then selects the complex with the closer mass to the theoretical weight. If for example extrapolated MW for this set of complexes is 200000 Da then A,B,C will be selected


> **Note:** __We recommend using collapsing based on calibration curve and molecular weight as this enforces the correct mass distribution__


All of the above parameters have the following default settings


| Parameter      | Default           |Possible                              |
| :--------------| :-----------------|:-------------------------------------|
| -Output        | './Output'        |any                                   |
| -sid           | './sample_ids.txt'|any                                   |
| -cal           | None              |any                                   |
| -mw_uniprot    | None              |any                                   |
| -all_fract     | 'all'             |[1>x>number of fractions, 'all']      |
| -is_ppi        | 'False'           |[True, False]                         |
| -merge         | 'all'             |['all', 'reference']                  |
| -co            | 'GO'              |['GO', 'SUPER', 'CAL', 'eCAL', 'NONE']|
| -fdr           | 0.75              |0>x>1                                 |

all parameters can be inspected using

```
python3 main.py --help
```

---
### Writing the experimental information file
The file ‘sample_ids.txt’ stores the experimental information and needs to contain the following headers

| Sample     | cond      |group|short_id|repl|fr|
| :----------| :---------| :---|:-------|:---|:-|

- __Sample__ full path of the file intended to be processed
- __cond__ condition name
- __group__ group number (integer, needs to be 1 for control)
- __short_id__ alternative id
- __repl__ replicate number within the contiions
- __fr__ number of fractions per file


> **Note:**  In the ‘Sample’ column, please make sure that the content is identical with the testing file name (with the file extension). In the ‘cond’ column, if you have multiple conditions, please label them exactly as ‘Ctrl’, ‘Treat1’, and ‘Treat2’ etc. Failure to do so will cause problems when running PCprophet.

Here is an example of a complete table with two conditions and three replicates

| Sample     | cond      |group|short_id|repl|fr|
| :----------| :----- |:-----|:-----|:-----|:-----|
| ./Input/c1r1.txt     | Ctrl      |1|ipsc_2i_1|1|65|
| ./Input/c1r2.txt     | Ctrl      |1|ipsc_2i_2|2|64|
| ./Input/c1r3.txt     | Ctrl      |1|ipsc_2i_3|3|65|
| ./Input/c2r1.txt     | Treat1      |2|ipsc_ra_1|1|65|
| ./Input/c2r2.txt     | Treat1      |2|ipsc_ra_2|2|65|
| ./Input/c2r3.txt     | Treat1      |2|ipsc_ra_3|3|65|




> **Note:**  __Differential analysis will be performed *automatically* if the sample_ids.txt file contains more than one group__



---
### Running PCprophet

PCprophet can be using all default settings with


```
python3 main.py
```

Parameters can be individually set, for example using an interaction network instead of a complex database

```
python3 main.py -db myppi.txt -is_ppi True
```



----

### Interpreting prediction results
There will be two folders generated by the PCprophet, including the ‘tmp’ folder and the user designated ‘Output’ folder. The ‘tmp’ folder stores all the intermediate files for PCprophet to process and therefore can be used for debugging and validation. The ‘tmp’ folder can be safely deleted after PCprophet finishes all the prediction and analysis. The ‘Output’ folder, on the other hand, harboured all the output files, results and plots generated by PCprophet.

In the output folder the following text files are present:

- __ComplexReport.txt__: All the predicted results, including positive and negative complexes. For positive predictions, we also mapped them to the database provided with the -db parameter to see if they have been documented. If they have been documented, we label them as ‘Reported’; otherwise, they are labelled as ‘Novel’.
- __PPIReport.txt__: Protein-protein interaction network generated from positive complexes. Suitable as input for network visualization tools such as Cytoscape.

In case differential analysis was performed two additional text files and one folder are going to be present

- __DifferentialComplexReport.txt__: Complex-level differential analysis, where complexes are scored based on the Baysean factors for the individual proteins

- __DifferentialProteinReport.txt__: Protein-level differential analysis, where the Baysean probability difference between each condition is reported.


- __Differential__: Differential delta plot of intensity between every condition and control. A flat line represents no difference between control and condition. A positive peak represents an increase in the control; while a negative peak represents an increase in the condition (right Y axis).


PCprophet generates the following QC plots


- __FalseDiscoveryRate.pdf__: an FDR plot where the positive hypotheses are filtered to control for false discovery rate using the positive complexes database provided. If not provided a fixed threshold of 0.5 is used.

- __RecallDatabase.pdf__: % of positive predicted complexes on the total size of the database provided.

One folder for each __short_id__ will be generated. Within that folder all the positive and negative complexes from the database  are plotted together with the novel positive complexes identified by PCprophet


### Import results into Cytoscape

Both __PPIReport.txt__ and __DifferentialProteinReport.txt__ are fully compatible with Cytoscape import without the need for any additional formatting

### PCProphet specific exceptions and errors

Depending on the error raised different fixes are needed.

- __NaRowError / NaInMatrixError__: There are 'NA' values in the input matrix, substitute them with 0
- __MissingColumnError__: Identifier columns (GN or ID) are missing
- __DuplicateRowError / DuplicateIdentifierError__: There are duplicates in the GN column. A common cause of this is mapping of isoform to the same gene name. Just add \_1 to one of the duplicate gene names
- __EmptyColumnError__: A column is only NA

*Note* for imputing column values in case of different number of fractions add a full 0 column


### FAQ and solution to common problems

* __Why in ComplexReport.txt the complexID has several complexes concatenated by # ?__ We are using the parsimony principle, thereby complexes for which there are not enough evidence (i.e with the same subunits identified across the experiment) are reported in the same complex group

* __-CAL flag for collapsing returns an error__! Check that the format of the calibration file. __A correctly formatted calibration file will have the fraction first as integer and the molecular weight in KDa as integer__

| | | |
|-|-|-|
|15| 1398 |
|24| 699 |
|31| 300 |
|39| 150 |
|47| 44 |
|53| 17 |

> **Note:**  Be sure to pass __ALSO__ the -mw_uniprot flag with a link to the appropriate file

* __-eCAL returns NotImplementedExceptions__ We are currently working on a MW weight free collapsing procedure where the calibration file is used without the -mw_uniprot flag. We decided to give as options to motivate us developing it fast!

* -__FalseDiscoveryRate.pdf looks weird__ This FDR plot is across GO score. Thereby we expect lower FDR with increase of GO score. However, as caveat depending on the database used and the complex identified within the database the FDR will vary greatly. For example a CORUM FDR of 0.75 corresponds approximately to a STRING FDR or 0.2.

* -__ConditionAlignement.pdf also looks weird__ this is quite common as we use a global alignement strategy with the rational that fractionations artifacts will influence the entire gradient by a similar factor across all fractions.  


### Contact
Please refer to [README.md](https://github.com/fossatiA/PCprophet/blob/master/README.md) for how to contact us

Commit message:

[DOCS] add input file description

PCprophet_instructions.md, after:

## PCprophet (command line version)

In the PCprophet package, all parameters can be configured either via the ‘ProphetConfig.conf’ file or via by running PCprophet using the command. When running the PCprophet, the parameters indicated in the command will be written into the ‘ProphetConfig.conf’ file. Generally, four types of features are needed:


## Input file

Input file need to be a wide format matrix with two essential columns:

__GN__ : Gene name, needs to be the first column
__ID__ : Uniprot identifier, needs to be the second column

Remaining columns needs to be ordered according to the fractionation scheme used. There is no strict requirement for column names apart from GN and ID, but they need to be ordered.
All quantitation schemes commonly used in proteomics such as MS1 or MS2 ion-extracted chromatogram (XIC), spectral counts (SPCs) and TMT or SILAC ratios are supported.

Examples of correct formatting are provided in the test_fract.txt data

### Parameter setup


##### Global parameters:

```
-Output The output folder
-sid  Sample identifier file
-cal  Calibration file (no headers)
-mw_uniprot Gene names to molecular mass
-db Database (either in CORUM format or STRING format)
```

**Note:** -db can be either a protein-protein interaction network or a complex database but it __always needs to be provided__.

The CORUM-link database can be user provided but as minimal requirement needs to have the following columns

- *ComplexID* unique numeric identifier
- *ComplexName* complex identifier
- *subunits(Gene name)* ; separated list of __gene names__ for the corresponding complex

Examples for this format can be downloaded from [CORUM](http://mips.helmholtz-muenchen.de/corum/#download)

In case of PPI database the format needs to be

|ProtA|ProtB|
|:----|:----|
|A    |B    |
|D    |A    |
|C    |E    |

In this case a Markov clustering is first performed to generate putative complexes which are then used for FDR control. PPI derived complexes are characterize by the identifier ppi__nr where nr stands for the cluster number from the Markov cluster

##### Pre-processing parameters:

```
-all_fract  The number of fractions to use [1, X].
-is_ppi Is the provided database a PPI network or a complex database
-merge  Choose ‘all’ for using data-driven+database based hypothesis generation and ‘reference’ use only database derived complexes

```


##### Post-processing parameters:

```
-co Mode for collapsing hypothesis to common complexes
-fdr  False discovery rate for hypothesis 0 > FDR > 1

```

**-co flag in depth** Due to the redundant nature of the complexes generated by hypothesis generation is necessary to collapse positives into single complex. Following there is an example and description of the parameter

| Members   | GO Score  |Prediction probability|# Members|Estimated MW |
|:----------|:----------|:---------------------|:--------|:------------|
|A,B        |0.6        |0.75                  |2        |90000        |
|A,B,C      |0.4        |0.6                   |3        |190000       |
|A,B,C,D    |0.3        |0.9                   |4        |250000       |

**-co GO** Selects the complex with the highest Go score per dendogram branch  (A,B)

**-co P** Selects the complex with the highest probability per dendogram branch (A,B,C,D)

**-co SUPER** Selects the complex with the highest number of members (superset) per dendrogram branch (A,B,C,D)


**-co CAL** Extrapolates the molecular weight from the apex peak for the reported complex using the calibration provided. Then selects the complex with the closer mass to the theoretical weight. If for example extrapolated MW for this set of complexes is 200000 Da then A,B,C will be selected


> **Note:** __We recommend using collapsing based on calibration curve and molecular weight as this enforces the correct mass distribution__


All of the above parameters have the following default settings


| Parameter      | Default           |Possible                              |
| :--------------| :-----------------|:-------------------------------------|
| -Output        | './Output'        |any                                   |
| -sid           | './sample_ids.txt'|any                                   |
| -cal           | None              |any                                   |
| -mw_uniprot    | None              |any                                   |
| -all_fract     | 'all'             |[1>x>number of fractions, 'all']      |
| -is_ppi        | 'False'           |[True, False]                         |
| -merge         | 'all'             |['all', 'reference']                  |
| -co            | 'GO'              |['GO', 'SUPER', 'CAL', 'eCAL', 'NONE']|
| -fdr           | 0.75              |0>x>1                                 |

all parameters can be inspected using

```
python3 main.py --help
```

---
### Writing the experimental information file
The file ‘sample_ids.txt’ stores the experimental information and needs to contain the following headers

| Sample     | cond      |group|short_id|repl|fr|
| :----------| :---------| :---|:-------|:---|:-|

- __Sample__ full path of the file intended to be processed
- __cond__ condition name
- __group__ group number (integer, needs to be 1 for control)
- __short_id__ alternative id
- __repl__ replicate number within the contiions
- __fr__ number of fractions per file


> **Note:**  In the ‘Sample’ column, please make sure that the content is identical with the testing file name (with the file extension). In the ‘cond’ column, if you have multiple conditions, please label them exactly as ‘Ctrl’, ‘Treat1’, and ‘Treat2’ etc. Failure to do so will cause problems when running PCprophet.

Here is an example of a complete table with two conditions and three replicates

| Sample     | cond      |group|short_id|repl|fr|
| :----------| :----- |:-----|:-----|:-----|:-----|
| ./Input/c1r1.txt     | Ctrl      |1|ipsc_2i_1|1|65|
| ./Input/c1r2.txt     | Ctrl      |1|ipsc_2i_2|2|64|
| ./Input/c1r3.txt     | Ctrl      |1|ipsc_2i_3|3|65|
| ./Input/c2r1.txt     | Treat1      |2|ipsc_ra_1|1|65|
| ./Input/c2r2.txt     | Treat1      |2|ipsc_ra_2|2|65|
| ./Input/c2r3.txt     | Treat1      |2|ipsc_ra_3|3|65|




> **Note:**  __Differential analysis will be performed *automatically* if the sample_ids.txt file contains more than one group__



---
### Running PCprophet

PCprophet can be using all default settings with


```
python3 main.py
```

Parameters can be individually set, for example using an interaction network instead of a complex database

```
python3 main.py -db myppi.txt -is_ppi True
```



----

### Interpreting prediction results
There will be two folders generated by the PCprophet, including the ‘tmp’ folder and the user designated ‘Output’ folder. The ‘tmp’ folder stores all the intermediate files for PCprophet to process and therefore can be used for debugging and validation. The ‘tmp’ folder can be safely deleted after PCprophet finishes all the prediction and analysis. The ‘Output’ folder, on the other hand, harboured all the output files, results and plots generated by PCprophet.

In the output folder the following text files are present:

- __ComplexReport.txt__: All the predicted results, including positive and negative complexes. For positive predictions, we also mapped them to the database provided with the -db parameter to see if they have been documented. If they have been documented, we label them as ‘Reported’; otherwise, they are labelled as ‘Novel’.
- __PPIReport.txt__: Protein-protein interaction network generated from positive complexes. Suitable as input for network visualization tools such as Cytoscape.

In case differential analysis was performed two additional text files and one folder are going to be present

- __DifferentialComplexReport.txt__: Complex-level differential analysis, where complexes are scored based on the Baysean factors for the individual proteins

- __DifferentialProteinReport.txt__: Protein-level differential analysis, where the Baysean probability difference between each condition is reported.


- __Differential__: Differential delta plot of intensity between every condition and control. A flat line represents no difference between control and condition. A positive peak represents an increase in the control; while a negative peak represents an increase in the condition (right Y axis).


PCprophet generates the following QC plots


- __FalseDiscoveryRate.pdf__: an FDR plot where the positive hypotheses are filtered to control for false discovery rate using the positive complexes database provided. If not provided a fixed threshold of 0.5 is used.

- __RecallDatabase.pdf__: % of positive predicted complexes on the total size of the database provided.

One folder for each __short_id__ will be generated. Within that folder all the positive and negative complexes from the database  are plotted together with the novel positive complexes identified by PCprophet


### Import results into Cytoscape

Both __PPIReport.txt__ and __DifferentialProteinReport.txt__ are fully compatible with Cytoscape import without the need for any additional formatting

### PCProphet specific exceptions and errors

Depending on the error raised different fixes are needed.

- __NaRowError / NaInMatrixError__: There are 'NA' values in the input matrix, substitute them with 0
- __MissingColumnError__: Identifier columns (GN or ID) are missing
- __DuplicateRowError / DuplicateIdentifierError__: There are duplicates in the GN column. A common cause of this is mapping of isoform to the same gene name. Just add \_1 to one of the duplicate gene names
- __EmptyColumnError__: A column is only NA

*Note* for imputing column values in case of different number of fractions add a full 0 column


### FAQ and solution to common problems

* __Why in ComplexReport.txt the complexID has several complexes concatenated by # ?__ We are using the parsimony principle, thereby complexes for which there are not enough evidence (i.e with the same subunits identified across the experiment) are reported in the same complex group

* __-CAL flag for collapsing returns an error__! Check that the format of the calibration file. __A correctly formatted calibration file will have the fraction first as integer and the molecular weight in KDa as integer__

| | | |
|-|-|-|
|15| 1398 |
|24| 699 |
|31| 300 |
|39| 150 |
|47| 44 |
|53| 17 |

> **Note:**  Be sure to pass __ALSO__ the -mw_uniprot flag with a link to the appropriate file

* __-eCAL returns NotImplementedExceptions__ We are currently working on a MW weight free collapsing procedure where the calibration file is used without the -mw_uniprot flag. We decided to give as options to motivate us developing it fast!

* -__FalseDiscoveryRate.pdf looks weird__ This FDR plot is across GO score. Thereby we expect lower FDR with increase of GO score. However, as caveat depending on the database used and the complex identified within the database the FDR will vary greatly. For example a CORUM FDR of 0.75 corresponds approximately to a STRING FDR or 0.2.

* -__ConditionAlignement.pdf also looks weird__ this is quite common as we use a global alignement strategy with the rational that fractionations artifacts will influence the entire gradient by a similar factor across all fractions.  


### Contact
Please refer to [README.md](https://github.com/fossatiA/PCprophet/blob/master/README.md) for how to contact us
